Seasional wise groundwater fluctuation map (Pre,Monsoon & Post Monsoon)of East Midnapur,1997


Groundwater is a precious and most widely distributed distinguished resource of the earth and unlike any other natural resource, it gets annual replenishment from the precipitation. Knowledge of spatial and temporal behaviour of groundwater is utmost important for its management. Levels of groundwater are generally gathered at random points. But for groundwater modelling, the measured groundwater levels are often required to be interpolated at the grid nodes. In the present study IDW(Inverse Distance Weightage) technique was used to interpolate the groundwater levels in  East Medinipur Region in West Bengal. Spherical Model was found the best fit after drawing a semi-variogram from the output of the spatial correlation operation. Also, the best parameters for nugget, sill and range were obtained from the best fit spherical model. Interpolation of pre and post monsoon groundwater levels was carried out for the year 1997. Finally, the water table fluctuation maps were generated showing the fluctuation in the pre monsoon period between the years, 1997 and the areas under rising/falling trend of groundwater table were delineated. The study shall be useful for planning groundwater development in East Medinipur Region and to suggest alternate cropping pattern for sustainable water resource development districts. The results reveal that the groundwater table in the central to southwest part of East Medinipur is declining in recent years. The groundwater recharge may be improved by construction of percolation tanks and farm ponds in the lower most corner of agricultural fields.
